This video is all about an operation called the dot product.
It is perhaps the most important operation in all of linear algebra and because Linear Algebra is so
important.
Then the dot product is therefore also one of the most important operations in statistics.
Machine learning A.I. deep learning all sorts of applications signal processing the 48 transform filtering
image analysis you name it if it's digital if it has computers involved or algorithms involved you are
almost guaranteed to see the dot product.
So what is the dot product.
Well it's an operation that's defined between two vectors the vectors have to be the same length or
the same dimensionality so the same number of elements in the two vectors.
And there's a couple of different notations for the dot product.
If A and B are vectors then you might see a dot B like this.
You might see a comma B in angle brackets like this.
You might see a with a T in the superscript and then B like this.
This is actually the most common form of showing the dot product in linear algebra.
This T and the superscript here is for the transpose operation and I'm going to explain in a few videos
what the transpose operation is and why that is important for the dot product.
But for now you can just recognize this form a transpose B is the dot product between vector A and vector
B.
The dot product is always a single number so therefore I'm indicating here using a scalar.
In this case alpha so you have two vectors.
They're the same length and the results the outcome of the dot product is a single number.
So the operation of the dot product is really simple.
Here is the algorithm.
All you do is multiply the individual elements of the corresponding elements from the vector and then
you sum up all of those individual multiplications.
So you will recognize this operator I introduced it as the summation operator in I think it was the
beginning of Algebra 2 section but it might have been Algebra 1 anyway.
It was certainly earlier in this course.
So you loop through all of the elements in vector A and vector B and then you multiply the first element
in vector A by the first element in vector B plus the second element in vector a plus this time the
second element in vector B and so on.
Up until n elements.
So let's switch to Python.
I will show you a few different ways of computing the dot product.
I'm going to use num Pi of course because we always use num pi with linear algebra in Python and actually
in the exercise not right now.
I'm going to use a little bit of late tech display coding all right so let's come up with some vectors.
Let's say this is going to be num pi dot a range.
So an array range let's go from 10 to 20.
And how about steps of three.
So just as a reminder because I think I haven't discussed this function a range in quite a while.
So you can give three inputs two or three inputs.
If you provide three inputs the way I do here then the output which is gonna be vector V will go from
10 to 20.
So from the first input to the second input in steps corresponding to the third input.
So let's see what this looks like.
So we get an array it's 10 13 16 19.
Now we couldn't get all the way up to 20.
Counting and steps of three because of you know how we started at 10.
So I guess if you'd like you could set this to be 19 but then that's going to be an exclusive counting
so it's interesting to note that 20 and 21 and twenty two will all produce exactly the same output.
Okay.
So this is four numbers long let's say.
Now I want another vector.
I'll call that W.
So let's say and P that a range and maybe I'll make this go from about five to 14.
Also in steps of three so there's a few ways to compute the dot product.
The first way that I'm going to show you is literally implementing the algorithm that I showed in the
slides.
So let's call this DP DP for dot product and then one because I'm gonna show a few different outcomes
or a few different functions for computing the dot product.
So I'll initialize this to be zero then I say for i in range 0 to the length of vector V.
I know what we need to do is loop through multiply all the corresponding elements in V and W.
So that is v the I's element in V times the highest element in W and then we set dp 1 to be equal to
itself plus this element y's multiplication.
All right.
Seems pretty straightforward.
This is just an implementation of the algorithm for computing the dot product.
Oh but we get an error it says index 3 is out of bounds for axis.
Okay.
So let's figure out what's going on here.
Well we already saw what vector V is.
Let's see what vector W is.
Huh.
So vector w only has three elements in it whereas vector V has four elements in it.
And you'll remember that I said in this light it's that the dot product is valid is defined only between
two vectors that have the same length.
Now vector V is four elements and vector W has three elements.
So that is not good.
So maybe I can change this to five and now you see a couple of things have happened first of all now
both vectors have four elements so that's good.
I think I'll get rid of that and the error message disappear.
There is no more error message.
All right so this is one mechanism.
I'm now going to show you another one.
So let's say num piled up some and then I will write num pi dot mole to line v comma W.
So this is going to implement element y's multiplication between the two inputs and then we sum them
together.
And then finally I'm going to do dot product 3.
That's going to be num dot dot for the dot product.
Okay.
No error messages.
And now I'm gonna print out all of these results so print dp 1 DP 2 and DP 3 whoops.
Prints we only want one print.
And the answer is five hundred and ninety six in all three cases.
Now needless to say in practice it's best to use this sometimes it's also sensible to use this formulation
but mostly for computing the dot product you would use the n p dot dot function.
However I think like I mentioned in previous videos it's useful at least once to see the actual algorithm
written out in code the exercise for this video is to write a python function that will take input as
to vectors so you specify two vectors tests whether the dot product is valid.
Between those two vectors and then returns the dot product.
If the DOT PRODUCT IS valid between the two input vectors or it gives an error message.
OK so positive video write some code.
Create your own python function.
And now I'm going to switch to Python and show you how I solved this I'm going to call this function.
My dot product it's going to take two inputs two vectors V and W and let's start by writing some comments.
So we need to test whether the dot product is defined and then we need to compute and display the dot
product.
Okay so the dot product is defined.
If the two vectors have the same length so the way that I'm going to set this up is by giving an error
message.
If the lengths are not equal to each other.
Otherwise we can just continue with the computation and the display.
So I will write if the length of V is not equal to the length of W..
So this exclamation point and then equals sine is the way to illustrate that you are testing for a lack
of equality.
So it's a test for equality of course would be double equal sign and the test if these two things are
not equal to each other then you use the exclamation point equals okay.
And then if the length of V is not equal to the length of W then we want to raise an error and the error
is going to be a value error because there's something wrong with the values of the inputs and I'm going
to specify the error message to be vectors must have the same length.
Okay so that's gonna be the error message.
And now the way that this code is going to be set up is that if this conditional is true then this error
message is going to be evaluated and then the function will immediately just stop right there.
But if this is not true and this conditional is false when the length of V equals the length of W then
this code never gets run.
So then we can proceed to compute and display the dot product and I'm going to do this all on one line.
I'm gonna say v transpose w this should be a lowercase V equals percent s and then here we replace this
with NUM pi dot dot of V and W maybe I'll make this present G.
So it's formatting this as a number instead of as a string.
All right.
So there is our function.
And now let's do a little bit of testing so I'm going to start by testing this with small variables
where I know exactly what the results should be.
So known pi dot array let's say how about zero comma 1 and v2 is going to be known pi dot array.
How about 1 comma zero.
Now this is a pretty useful set of vectors for testing because I know that the dot product between these
two is going to be exactly zero.
You can see that just by looking at the numbers.
So the DOT PRODUCT IS this time is this which is zero plus this time is this which is also zero.
So let's see.
My dot product V1 comma V2.
And we see that the dot product between these two vectors is zero.
And now you know maybe I'll change this.
So it ends up being one and now I'm going to add another element here and we get a value error vectors
must have the same length.
Okay.
So that works so far.
Now I want to test something else here.
I'm going to generate some random numbers.
Let's see N.P. that random that Rand and and now I'm going to make this be a 1 by 10 sized matrix.
So this is going to be a row vector.
And then over here I'm gonna say random that Rand and actually let me start with the same thing.
So let's generate two row vectors of random numbers.
Now I don't know a prairie what the resulting dot product is going to be but I can test and see that
this in fact gave me an error.
Now this is not the error that I tested for.
This is an error on the line that computes the dot product.
So to gain some insight into what is happening with this error let's check out the dark string for NPR
dot dot and see if this is at all informative.
So this tells us that for inputs A and B if a and b are one dimensional arrays it computes the inner
products of the inner product is another term for the dot product.
So that's what we want.
But if a and b are 2d arrays it is actually implementing matrix multiplication and then the help file
says we should use the at symbol or map Mol for it instead of the dot product.
Now I'm going to talk more about matrix multiplication in a later video but essentially this is where
things are going wrong.
We are inputting what we consider to be vectors but what Python is considering to be 2d arrays.
And that's because you have these two dimensions here.
So what can we do about this.
Well one thing that I'm going to do is introduce you to a function called squeeze.
So for starters let's say print num Pi the shape of V1.
So we see the shape of v 1 is 1 by 10.
And then we can also just print out this vector just to look at it.
So you can clearly see that it's a row vector.
So this is all one row but it's being printed out on the second line just because of space reasons.
But internally this is being represented as a two dimensional matrix instead of as a one dimensional
vector.
So what I'm going to do is use a function called squeeze let's call V 1 equals and P does squeeze v
1.
Now the idea of this function squeeze is to remove any dimensions that aren't really sort of useful.
These are called Singleton dimensions.
There are dimensions that have a size of 1.
So now I'm going to run this code again.
And now you can see that this turned back into a vector we have squeezed out the other dimension and
converted that into a vector.
Now notice that if I set v 1 to be for example a 5 by 10 matrix then squeeze doesn't actually do anything.
Now I'll comment this out and run it again.
There are no Singleton dimensions in this matrix.
So squeeze didn't actually change anything.
OK.
So with that in mind I'm going to add a little bit to this function.
I'm going to say V equals num piled up.
Squeeze V and W equals num paid out squeeze W.
So that is taking care of these possibilities where you have what you know the user probably is considering
to be a vector but is actually internally represented as a matrix.
OK.
So let's try this again.
All right.
Of course it's still giving an Arab because I haven't rerun this code yet.
So let me rerun this cell and now it works again in this video.
You have learned about the dot product and you learned a little bit more about working with vectors
and matrices in num pi and in Python.
Stay tuned for the next video.
You're going to get to see an application of the dot product in statistics.